#summary Looping
=Reading=

Go here: 

[http://www.cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/control/#loops Loops]

and read through that section.

=Extra Reading=

http://www.cprogramming.com/tutorial/lesson3.html

=Assignments=

Once you understand the content, complete these assignments.

=Tip: `printf`=

You are strongly encouraged to give the [CPP_TipsAndTricks#printf printf()] function some consideration when completing the assignments.

==Counter==
Create a *For Loop* that counts 1 to 102.  Count up by 4.  Display the number each time it goes through the loop.

==Counterintuitive Exit==

Create a *Do While Loop* that asks the user if they would like to quit the program. Keep on asking the question until the user says no.  If the user does not enter a proper response (yes or no), tell the user they entered an improper answer and ask if they would like to quit again.

==Right Triangle==

Write a program to print this triangle:
{{{
        +
        ++
        +++
        ++++
        +++++
        ++++++
        +++++++
        ++++++++
        +++++++++
        ++++++++++
}}}
Don't use ten printf statements; use *two nested loops* instead. You'll have to use braces around the body of the outer loop if it contains multiple statements:
{{{
        for(i = 1; i <= 10; i = i + 1)
        {
                /* multiple statements */
                /* can go in here */
        }
}}}
(Hint: a string you hand to printf does not have to contain the newline character \n.)

===Extra Practice===
Rewrite this program to allow the user to pick the height of the triangle, still following the same line pattern. You may want to use an `unsigned int` in combination with an [CPP_TipsAndTricks#Input_Validation input check] to prevent the user from creating impossible triangles.

|| <-[CPP_Lesson1 Lesson 2 - If/Else Statements] || *Lesson 3* || [CPP_Lesson4 Lesson 4 - Switch/Case]-> ||